
================ PAGE 8 ================
science, bioinformatics, law enforcement and academia. In 2024 and 
2025, the IGGAB published professional standards and accreditation 
requirements [66] and a code of professional ethics [67]. IGGAB also 
administers an IGG accreditation exam.
2.4.6. UK Forensic Science Regulator
The UK Forensic Science Regulator (UKFSR) oversees forensic sci-
ence efforts in England, Wales, and Northern Ireland. In 2021, the 
Forensic Science Regulator Act passed by Parliament made the Code of 
Practice statutory beginning in October 2023. Version 2 of this Code of 
Practice (now 388 pages) [80] went into effect in October 2025. Table 3 
lists 15 guidance documents pertinent to biological evidence from the 
UKFSR [68– 82]. Some recent changes in the guidance documents 
accompanying the Code of Practice (i.e., those UKFSR documents in 
Table 3 with Issue 2, 3, or 4 in their title) appear to be editorial rather 
than substantive compared to previous versions.
2.4.7. European Union and ENFSI
The European Network of Forensic Science Institutes (ENFSI) DNA 
Working Group published four documents in the past three years: a best 
practice manual for human forensic biology and DNA profiling [83] as 
well as guidelines for internal validation/verification of various aspects 
of the DNA profiling process [84], DNA database management [85], and 
DNA contamination minimization in laboratories [86] (see Table 3).
2.4.8. Australia and New Zealand
During the past three years, the Australian New Zealand Policing 
Advisory Agency (ANZPAA) National Institute of Forensic Science 
(NIFS) published three short (1- or 2-page) documents considering key 
principles on applying investigative genetic genealogy [87], reporting 
forensic biology evidence [88], and providing an authentic quality 
culture in forensic science [89]. In June 2025, ANZPAA NIFS also shared 
guidelines for validation of forensic science methods [90] (see Table 3).
2.4.9. Other international efforts
The Association for the Advancement of Blood and Biotherapies 
(AABB) 23 published the 16th edition of their Standard for Relationship 
Testing Laboratories, which became effective on January 1, 2024. This 
documentary standard was developed by the AABB Relationship Testing 
Standards Committee and applies to laboratories accredited for pater-
nity testing and other forms of genetic relationship assessment [91]. 
The International Society for Forensic Genetics (ISFG) DNA Com-
mission 24 published one article during the timeframe of this INTERPOL 
review (see Table 3) relating to short tandem repeat sequence nomen-
clature [92]. This ISFG DNA Commission described five recommenda-
tions covering 1) sequence strings and a minimum reporting range, 2) 
additional sequence formats, 3) resources for researchers, bio-
informaticians, and practitioners, 4) information on characterizing new 
STR loci, and 5) considerations for incorporating STR sequences and 
other new markers into investigative databases [92].
Forensic Science International: Genetics, the official journal of ISFG, 
provided guidance for authors and reviewers, which among other topics 
emphasized the importance of having “ conclusions supported by a 
comprehensive set of open-access data and/or open-source software 
and/or other documentation to ensure that the work is accessible and 
useful to the broader community”  [93]. With a goal to improve consis-
tency in studies on DNA transfer, persistence, prevalence, and recovery 
(TPPR), editorial guidance was recently provided with a supplemental 
Excel template outlining the minimum information required for each 
sample in future analyses [94].
In November 2023, INTERPOL released their updated Guide to
Disaster Victim Identification (DVI) with multiple annexes [95]. The 
Forensic Science Committee of the International Association of Chiefs of 
Police (IACP) provided two resolutions in 2024 that were accepted by 
the IACP membership regarding the use of rapid DNA in mass disaster 
responses [96] and promoting adoption of forensic science standards 
[97].
In June 2025, Technical Committee 272 of the International Orga-
nization for Standardization (ISO), which was created in 2012 to work 
on standardization and guidance in forensic science, 25 published four 
parts to ISO 21043 covering vocabulary [98], analysis [99], interpre-
tation [100], and reporting [101]. These ISO 21043 standards are 
intended for all aspects of forensic science, not just biological evidence, 
and “ represents a unique opportunity to unify and advance forensic 
science as a discipline, and to improve the reliability of expert opinions 
and trust in the justice system”  [104].
3. Advances in current practices
This section contains information of primary use to law enforcement 
and practitioners and is focused on publications that describe advances 
in current practices. The following section (Section 4) contains infor-
mation that is researcher-focused with emphasis on emerging technol-
ogies and research studies.
Most of the article summary text in both sections was written by AI 
(Gemini 3 Pro Thinking Mode) using the prompts described in Section 
1.2 of this review. For the text of Sections 3 and 4, reference citations 
(author-year) refer to the sorted references listed in the specified sec-
tions found in Supplemental File 2. This approach has been used (after 
consulting with the journal editor-in-chief) to avoid having a very long list of 
references at the end of this review article that the journal publisher would 
have to type set for publication.
3.1. Rapid DNA analysis
Rapid DNA instruments that provide integrated “ swab-in-profile-
out”  results in 90 min or less can be used in police booking station en-
vironments and assist investigations outside of a traditional laboratory 
environment.
Books, Review Articles, and Guidance. A systematic review pub-
lished in January 2023 examined 8 ParaDNA, 21 RapidHIT, 12 ANDE, 
and 2 RapidHIT & ANDE articles available in 2022 or earlier, and 
determined that while impressive developments have occurred with 
these technologies, “ there is still no portable device containing all the 
required steps available for fast analysis (under 1 h for a full STR profile) 
of real ‘dirty’ samples directly at the crime scene”  (Bruijns et al., 2023). 
Options for improving forensic genetic workflows in small geographical 
areas were evaluated for cost-effectiveness (De La Chica et al., 2025). 
The FBI released a comprehensive guide covering all aspects of imple-
menting rapid DNA analysis (Federal Bureau of Investigation 2025), 
while the UK Forensic Science Regulator published specific guidance for 
methods employing these devices (Forensic Science Regulator 2025). 
Detailed protocols for profile development using the Applied Biosystems 
RapidHIT ID System were documented (Foley 2023). The IACP Forensic 
Science Committee issued a resolution incorporating rapid DNA analysis 
into mass disaster response plans (IACP Forensic Science Committee 
2024), and its specific utility for human identity determination was 
highlighted following the Maui wildfires (Novroski 2023). Additionally, 
a book chapter reviewed DNA sequencing and rapid DNA tests within 
the context of modern forensic tools (Singh & Rawtani 2023).
Results with Rapid DNA Instruments. Empirical studies have 
expanded the applications of rapid DNA instruments beyond standard 
reference samples. A field experiment introduced a rapid DNA analysis
23 https://www.aabb.org/standards-accreditation/standards/relationship-test
ing-laboratories. 
24 https://www.isfg.org/DNA+Commission.
25 ISO/TC 272 Forensic sciences: https://www.iso.org/committee/4395817. 
html.
J.M. Butler Forensic Science International: Synergy 13 (2026) 100705 
8 


================ PAGE 9 ================
procedure for crime scene samples outside the laboratory (de Roo et al., 
2023). Two simplified tooth sample preparation methods were devel-
oped for conventional and RapidHIT ID workflows (Eaton et al., 2024). 
The processing of biological samples from simulated radiological 
terrorist events was evaluated using rapid DNA instruments (Fr´egeau & 
Laurin 2024). The RapidHIT ID system was applied for fast cell 
authentication via STR profiling (Koh et al., 2023). A comparative 
analysis of two rapid DNA technologies was conducted for blood and 
saliva-based samples (Laurin et al., 2023). The performance of two 
different RapidHIT ID cartridge types was compared for generating 
forensic leads (Lim et al., 2025). Results from the 2023 multi-laboratory 
study were reported for the I-Chip (Romsos et al., 2024) and the Rap-
idINTEL Plus sample cartridge (Romsos et al., 2024). Subsampling blood 
swabs was identified as an efficient practice for RapidHIT ID analyses 
(Siatka et al., 2024). A simplified differential extraction method was 
developed to obtain investigative leads from sexual assault evidence 
using the RapidHIT ID (Tirado et al., 2025). Finally, the success rate of 
rapid DNA technology was evaluated for kinship analysis purposes 
(Ünsal Sapan et al., 2024).
Rapid Methods or Assays. Innovations in rapid testing extend to 
novel sensors and amplification techniques. A quartz tuning fork-based 
biosensor was developed for latent DNA detection at crime scenes 
(Alzahrani et al., 2025). A rapid ABO genotyping method was created 
using loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) and real-time 
PCR (Choi et al., 2024). A critical review examined the conjugation of 
visual enhancers in lateral flow immunoassays for forensic analysis 
(Dede & van Dam 2025). A Fusion-5 Filter-based microchip was intro-
duced for efficient on-chip DNA extraction and PCR amplification 
(Nagpal & Kumar 2024). Field-adapted species identification was ach-
ieved by combining multiplex multienzyme isothermal rapid amplifi-
cation with lateral flow dipsticks (Sun et al., 2024). Rapid human-
specific DNA quantitation was demonstrated using a microfluidic 
amplification module at the point of care (Tan & Selden 2023). Strate-
gies for proactive crime scene response to optimize investigations were 
discussed (Wickenheiser 2023), alongside a new service delivery model 
focusing on speed in the forensic laboratory (Wickenheiser & Knutson 
2024). Additionally, a recombinase polymerase amplification assay was 
developed for the specific and rapid detection of human DNA (Zheng 
et al., 2023).
3.2. DNA databases and ethics
Forensic DNA databases can aid investigations by demonstrating 
connections between crime scenes, linking a previously developed DNA 
profile from an arrestee or convicted offender to biological material 
recovered from a crime scene, or aiding identification of missing persons 
through association of remains with biological relatives. Establishment 
of these databases requires significant investments over time to enroll 
data from crime scenes and potential serial offenders or unidentified 
human remains and relatives of missing persons. This section explores 
issues around national DNA databases, elimination databases, familial 
searching, and ethics related to database governance.
Books, Review Articles, and Guidance. The ENFSI DNA Working 
Group released comprehensive guidelines for DNA database manage-
ment review and recommendations (ENFSI DNA Working Group 2023). 
A review discussed the specific utility of trace DNA within forensic 
science for both investigative and intelligence purposes (Hoffmann 
et al., 2024). Additionally, a chapter in a recent text provided a broad 
overview of forensic DNA databases (Omran 2025).
DNA Databases. The effectiveness of DNA banks in criminal in-
vestigations was measured in Brazil (Ataide & Sousa 2023). The use-
fulness of one-off DNA database searches was evaluated in Western 
Switzerland (Basset et al., 2025). A retrospective study analyzed the first 
implementation of the Fast DNA Identification Line (FIDL) automated 
workflow at the Netherlands Forensic Institute (Benschop et al., 2022). 
Quality management practices were reviewed for a Brazilian forensic
DNA laboratory (Bezerra et al., 2025). A new model for an integrated 
forensic database was proposed for India (Das et al., 2024), while 
another study tested the efficacy of recent STR markers in the Indian 
population (Dixit et al., 2025). ProbRank was introduced as an efficient 
search method for complex mixtures using a quantitative likelihood 
ratio model (Hoogenboom et al., 2023). A proposal was made to build a 
DNA database to help identify children stolen in conflicts (Huston 
2025). The impact of DNA databases on crime investigation was 
analyzed in Ukraine (Kostiuchenko et al., 2024). Public support for 
expanding DNA databases in South Korea was linked to police empow-
erment and legitimacy (Kuen et al., 2025). The potential of DNA data-
banks in Canada to provide information on the criminal behavior of 
unidentified individuals was explored (Lavergne et al., 2024). The Ital-
ian experience with DNA data banks was reviewed regarding facts and 
perception (Luparia et al., 2024). The establishment of a DNA finger-
printing database was detailed for the United Arab Emirates (Madi 
2024). The impact of Brazil's convict genetic profile identification 
project was evaluated after five years (Minervino et al., 2024). Public 
awareness and willingness to establish a national forensic DNA and 
odontology database were assessed in Egypt (Moawad et al., 2025). 
Awareness and acceptance of storing DNA profiles in a forensic databank 
were assessed in Malaysia (Nawani et al., 2023). Empirical studies 
evaluated searching national databases with complex profiles using 
probabilistic genotyping (Nozownik et al., 2025). The “ Prüm imple-
mentation”  in the UK was cited as a success story of collaboration 
(Revoir et al., 2025). DNA profiling issues in India, such as sample 
preservation and legislation, were addressed (Sahajpal & Bhandari 
2024). DNA databases were highlighted as a tool to improve the search 
for missing persons in Brazil (Silva Junior et al., 2022). The value of 
forensic DNA databases was discussed (Smith & Horne 2024), as well as 
their establishment in Africa (Smith & Horne 2024) and future di-
rections for the continent (Smith et al., 2024). In the Sahel region of 
Africa, the need to update national security policy to support forensic 
DNA databases was emphasized (Zeye et al., 2024).
Elimination Databases. Best practice recommendations were pub-
lished for the management and use of quality assurance DNA elimina-
tion databases (ANSI/ASB 171). The importance of including staff 
genetic profiles in these databases was highlighted (Bogas et al., 2025). 
Hungarian legislation regarding the implementation of an elimination 
database was reviewed (Nogel 2024). A comparative analysis of elimi-
nation databases across seven European countries was conducted (Nogel 
et al., 2025).
Familial Searching. Y-chromosomal kinship estimation was pro-
posed to assist forensic familial searching (Claerhout et al., 2022). 
Regulatory frameworks for familial searching in Hungary were dis-
cussed (Nogel 2022). A new search tool was implemented for familial 
searches in the Israel criminal DNA database (Ram et al., 2023). The 
National Forensic DNA Database of South Africa was utilized for familial 
searching to aid in identifying missing persons (Singh et al., 2025). A 
report detailed the outcomes of Swedish familial searches from 2019 to 
2024 (Widen & Ansell 2025).
Ethics and Database Governance. EU law concerning access to 
research biobanks for forensic purposes was analyzed (Aime et al., 
2023). Legal ethics regarding double jeopardy and splitting cases were 
discussed (Akhtar 2024). The balance between law, medicine, and ethics 
in state genomic registries was examined in Ukraine (Akhtyrska & 
Kostiuchenko 2023). The intersection of behavioral genetics, big data, 
and the risk of future offending was explored (Alimardani et al., 2023). 
Stakeholder perspectives on humanitarian forensics and international 
kinship matching were surveyed (Amankwaa et al., 2025). Migration 
control and Britain's DNA profiling pilot project were historically 
analyzed (Bivins 2024). A code of conduct was published for Italian 
forensic geneticists (Buscemi et al., 2022). Limitations of forensic sci-
ence in rape and murder cases in India were discussed (Charan & 
Manikyam 2023).
Ethical considerations for forensic genetic frequency databases were
J.M. Butler Forensic Science International: Synergy 13 (2026) 100705 
9 

